Good morning everybody.
Welcome to Mac OS X in
Scientific Computing.
For those of you that I haven't met,
I think there's quite a few of you,
my name is Liz Kerr and I head
up the Marketing Group for
Science and Technology at Apple.
This is my third developer conference and
I have to say I'm thrilled to be here.
The momentum that we've seen over
the past few years in this market
is tremendous and it's really very
much tied to the scientific apps
that you all bring to the platform.
So I'm going to spend a few minutes
to kick off this morning's session to
talk a little bit about that momentum
and also to talk about how my team
is working to keep that going both
as a team and with our developers,
with you guys.
So the first thing I want to talk
about is just some interesting trends
we've seen in the growth of the
science markets in three main areas.
And this is really being driven
by new applications and better
applications in all of these areas.
In things like medical imaging
with programs like OSIRICS that
keeps getting better,
and new developers coming to the platform
like a group called Calgary Scientific.
And we even found out this year
we have a medical image storage
system that's FDA approved
that has come to the platform.
Really exciting stuff in medicine.
And engineering programs like
LS Dyna finally coming to Mac OS X.
Huge, huge benefit to our customer base
and a real good opportunity for us
to expand into these different areas.
And then in chemistry with programs
like Vita from OpenEye that brings
a three dimensional element and
just beautiful graphics to the
platform to expand what we have to
offer for our chemistry customers.
One of the things that has been so
exciting to see from an Apple perspective
is just how fast our science
developers switched to UB apps and
provided those out to the community.
Really faster than any other
sub-market area that we saw.
This is just a graphic to show,
we're obviously not all
the way to February yet,
but looking at the top 100
scientific applications,
just how quickly those came over.
I mean it seemed like we had
at least a handful even when we
announced the Intel processors.
It was fantastic.
So this is something that
we're thrilled about,
you guys should be extremely proud of,
and it's just a real testament to how
dedicated you are to providing the
science customers with the latest and
greatest versions of your applications.
take advantage of our technology.
This is a little bit of a digression,
but one of the things we
always get asked about,
especially from our scientific
computing customers and developers,
is Fortran compilers.
So I wanted to spend a minute and
talk about the Intel Fortran compiler
that's available for Mac OS X.
This, of course,
supports the Core Duo processors.
It's got an auto-vectorization feature,
which is new,
not something you could use for PowerPC.
There is whole application
optimization with the
inter-procedural optimization feature.
And then if you have an
appropriate training workload,
you can also get further
optimization from your app with
profile-guided optimization.
Now this is called the
Professional Edition,
and there will be special pricing for
the Fortran compilers through December,
so through the end of the year.
So something to speak to the
Intel folks about if you're interested.
So a little bit about
what we've been doing,
my team and partnered with our
developers in this past year.
And just to tell you a few
ways that we've been working
with the developer community.
The first thing I want to talk about
is just our conferences and trade shows
because we really do mostly partner with
developers to show complete solutions
on the platform because that's what our
customers are very much interested in.
So at national level conferences like
Society for Neuroscience as an example.
But we're also doing smaller things.
Regional shows,
we did a show called BioCom which is a
small biotech show in the San Diego area
which was really fun and a great
way for us to get the message out
about the Apple platform and the
solutions available on the platform.
And then even to the
level of users groups.
So a lot of you probably have
users groups for your customers.
And just to let you know that we're...
We're always interested in playing
a role here if it's appropriate.
And this is just an example we did,
participated in the OpenEye
user group this year.
So for those of you that
visit apple.com/science,
and I hope all of you
do on a regular basis,
this is really the heart and soul
of the science marketing group.
And we have a new web page
that launched yesterday,
a new look and feel to the home page and
some new sections of apple.com/science.
And the message here really is just that
we're wanting things to be a bit lively
or a better place for your customers
and our customers to learn more about
what's available on the platform.
But also a new focus,
this is the home page,
on science solutions.
And this is really critical for us
to have the right applications on
Mac OS X and really highlight the way
that the technology comes together
with the applications to provide
customers with a real workhorse
for them in the lab or in the lab.
And this is really critical for us
to have the right applications on
Mac OS X and really highlight the way
that the technology comes together
with the applications in their office.
So this is just a screenshot
of the new solutions page.
And you'll see this evolve over time as
we get really nice things come together
that we can highlight on this page.
And each of these, of course,
will have its own sub page
with much more detail.
And each of these, of course,
will have its own sub page
with much more detail.
The other thing that we do fairly
often with developers is we highlight
new applications to the platform.
And this is an example with
Bitplane coming to the platform.
And again, this is a rework of this page,
so it pops out a little bit
more if you're brand new and
we can highlight you here.
But it's a great way for us to help you
get the word out and have some marketing
weight behind a launch on Mac OS X or
an improvement or whatever it is.
The other thing that we do are profiles.
You've probably seen these.
We do a lot of them focused on customers,
but we also do them occasionally
focused on developers.
This is a group called Thrust
Belt Imaging that we recently
published on our website.
Fantastic story about
this group of developers.
I would encourage you,
if you feel like you have a compelling
story or if you have a customer that's
using your application in a cool way
that you think would be a good story,
please let us know.
We'd be happy to consider it,
and we're always looking for
great profiles and stories,
both from a developer perspective
and a customer perspective,
or a combination of both.
So please let us know.
For those of you that forgot,
there's something called
the Mac Products Guide.
And this is just to remind
you that it's still here.
It's still a great
resource for our end users.
They go here all the time
to learn what's on Mac OS X.
If you don't have an updated profile or a
profile at all on the Mac Products Guide,
this is an end user,
you put your own information
into the Products Guide.
So I encourage you all to do this
if you haven't or you haven't
looked at your entry in a long time.
Keep it fresh because
this is where people look.
So another thing that we do
on a periodic basis is we send
emails out to our customer base.
And in many cases that's hundreds
of thousands of people that
could get this communication.
And we've been doing some
of these with a focus on,
again,
product launches from our developers.
This one is a product called
Array Assist from Strategene.
And it's a great solution
for our customers,
so we wanted to highlight this.
So this is just another example
of how we try to really work
with you to kind of boost up the
message of Apple and our solutions.
I wanted to mention some community
resources just for those of
you that aren't aware of them.
I think most of you probably are by now.
But there's some great
organizations that are,
the first two are independent of
Apple but we work very closely with them.
Macresearch.org and Macenterprise.org.
These both have websites and communities
and are great forums for discussion,
product reviews, product discussions,
lots of information that's
completely independent of Apple so
there's no editorial from us.
So it's a nice community,
these are both really
nice community forums.
There's also the
Apple Developer Connection and this
is probably a resource you're really
familiar with but I encourage you to
review that occasionally because there's
lots of new information that gets posted
there that could be quite useful for you.
So with that,
I'm going to turn it over to Bud Tribble,
who's our VP of Software Technology,
and we're excited to have him here.
Thanks, Bud.
[Transcript missing]
What I'd like to do is talk about
Mac and the sciences and start
out with spotlighting some trends
that we see going on and I'm sure
all of you see going on as well.
Science to me is one of
our more fun markets.
We like to,
you hear a lot about Mac being
in the creative markets.
To me I like to think of the
science market as being the
most creative market we're in.
There's a lot of change going on
right now in the scientific market.
I'd like to go through what
are the things that are driving
that and illustrate that.
We have a few customers here to
illustrate some of these points.
First one is data sensor proliferation.
And this is leading to an
explosion of data which we'll
get into in the next section.
But really what's happening is
that sensors are going to be the
most important part of the data.
And what's happening is that
sensors are becoming cheap,
small, ubiquitous,
networked with mesh networks.
There's a torrent of data
coming in from these.
Now this will be everything from
large projects that generate in
and of themselves torrents of data.
Like the synoptic sky survey
generating petabytes per year.
You're going to hear about
the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN that again is a petabytes
per year generation of data.
These are pouring into disk
drives and pouring into databases.
As that data gets analyzed,
it explodes yet again to keep
around the analyzed data.
All the way to small meshed networks
that are monitoring microclimates.
Seismic monitoring is one example.
The data is coming in
all sorts of diversity.
The industry is settling in many cases
on standard formats for this data,
open formats for this data.
These sensors are out there.
They're always on.
They're pouring in data.
They're supporting scientific research.
But we have to put all
the data somewhere.
Just right here in California,
under our noses, there's a 24/7,
200 plus seismic stations monitoring,
pouring that data into companies
and the government agencies that are
watching the earthquake activity,
trying to predict the next earthquake.
This is a tremendous amount
of data to deal with.
Which brings us to the next issue,
which is data storage.
As I mentioned,
some of these projects are
generating petabytes per year.
And it's actually stripping the ability,
as fast as we can build disk drives,
it's stripping our
ability to store the data.
The San Diego Supercomputer Center has
a project called Data Central,
which they're very proud of.
It has a petabyte of online storage
with about 10 times that much offline.
But as you can see with
these large projects,
and as you'll hear about
with these large projects,
even that kind of a storage
facility is rapidly overflowed.
There's a recent study in Nature that
made a determination that the amount of
scientific data is doubling every year,
so you have an exponential growth curve.
I actually think that's probably a
little underrepresented or underreported.
If it was only doubling every year,
then actually our disk drives
would be able to keep up with it,
because the storage capacity on
disk drives is actually doubling
about every year for the same price.
An extremely important thing for these
online repositories is that they're
accessible by multiple scientists.
So these many times are open repositories
that can support multiple research
projects going on around the world.
That's not always true.
For example, in oil exploration,
these databases tend to be tightly held
for reasons that are sort of obvious.
But in many cases,
there are multiple research
groups supported around the
world working on these data sets.
There's an increasing use of storage
area network for these systems.
And that is simply because really there's
no other way to manage these terabyte
or petabyte class amounts of data.
Just managing them as a flat
network file system is too much of a
management burden really for anybody.
And what SAN really brings to the story,
or projects like XSAN,
products like XSAN,
is the ability to manage
these huge data repositories.
To illustrate this,
I'd like to invite Fons
Rademaker from CERN.
He works on the Large Hadron Collider
and he'll give you just a feeling
for the amount of data that are being
generated and what they do with it.
So Fons, thank you.
Okay, good morning.
Most of you probably have heard of
CERN as the place where the web was born.
But actually we are doing, you know,
our core business is particle physics,
pure research in high energy physics.
So there's no direct commercial
offspring from this or goal of it.
So our business is the bleeding edge
physics and to be able to achieve our
goal we need bleeding edge computing.
First of all the CERN Large Hadron
Collider is a machine that's been built
since the last 10 years and hopefully
it will start in September 2007,
producing its first collisions by
proton beams that collide on each other
with a center of mass energy of 14 TeV,
which is by far the highest energy
that any accelerator ever has achieved.
The LHC is a 27 km circumference machine,
it's under the border between
Switzerland and France in
a very nice location.
So very convenient to work.
It consists of at least some
1200 superconducting magnets,
cryo-dipoles.
Each dipole,
the whole system is filled with
liquid helium and cooled to
almost absolute temperature.
It generates a very high magnetic
field to keep the relatively
heavy protons in the tight orbit.
Of course to detect all the particles
that are being generated in the
collisions we built humongous detectors,
very large detectors.
There are four detectors being built at
the four different interaction regions.
Two are called ATLAS and CMS.
They are general purpose detectors
that will measure basically everything
that happens in the collision and they
will be able to analyze and determine
all kinds of new possible physics that
can happen in this region of energy.
Then you have two other detectors,
ALIS and LHCb.
They are more custom detectors for
measuring really specific physics events.
And ALIS, the detector where I work for,
we also work with detecting
heavy ion collisions.
So one month per year the
LHC will run heavy ions and then
you get a huge data stream of,
we will generate huge data streams.
So to summarize,
the four detectors together will generate
about 10 petabytes of data per year,
record 10 to the 10th events in total,
and there will be about 4,000 or 5,000
physicists worldwide trying to analyze
this 10 petabytes of data day and night.
So, the LHC of course, the accelerator,
the beams circulate with
almost the speed of light,
so you have about 40 million
collisions per second happening.
Of course nobody can record this
kind of amount of data streams.
So the experiments after filtering,
we get about 100 interesting
collisions per second.
So depending on the detector,
the amount of data they measure,
you measure from 1 to 12
megabytes per collision.
And with that rate you can get up,
for the case of Alice,
to 1.2 gigabytes per second.
And that data rate will be sustained
for at least 24/7 for one month,
after 1.2 gigabytes per second.
And that's about a bit more than one
petabyte of data that you have to
record in this one month of time.
Like I said, 10 to the 10 collisions
will be registered,
that will be about 10 petabytes,
and if you put it on conventional
CDs you get a stack of about 20
km high generated in one year.
And that for every year,
and the machine is planned to
operate for the coming 15 years.
So how do we are going
to analyze this data?
Of course you cannot have a
single data center that will be
able to process all this data.
I mean there's no way that you
can even put them in one room.
So what we are working on is,
okay also before you can
put them all in one room,
you need worldwide collaboration.
So nations don't want to invest the
money to put all the machines at CERN in
one location to analyze the data there.
So all the nations want to
prefer to build large clusters
in their universities or
research centers where the local
scientists will analyze the data.
Of course also the
competences of the people,
the system managers are
naturally distributed.
And like I said, just at CERN there's not
enough real estate to house a
computer center of that size.
So all these computer centers,
they will be running,
99% of them runs Linux for data
processing and the different levels,
different versions of
Linux and different hardware.
So it's a heterogeneous environment
where the software has to
work on in reproducible ways.
You cannot have physics that
runs one analysis in one site,
turn different results when it runs
on a different site with different
versions of the OS or compilers.
So let's be well understood
and well maintained.
To provide for the physicist an
environment where they can just submit
the analysis jobs from a central
point and don't care where it runs.
We have been working for a long
time on the concept of the grid,
which has been very popular.
You know,
people make everything as named grid,
but the real idea behind the grid
is that you can run worldwide
in a way that it looks like
you run in a local data center.
And actually we will need grids of grids,
because for political and different
reasons you don't have a single grid.
I mean, people make the European grid
and US grid and Asian grid and
they all have to work together.
So for example we have the EEGE grid,
which is a European project that
was funded by the European Union and
is now worldwide deployed.
So this test setup,
because we don't have the real data yet,
but this environment where we're testing,
we have 180 sites online,
providing 15,000 CPUs at the moment,
and running 14,000 jobs per day.
Considering that for the full
data analysis you will need about
100,000 CPUs online and with 400,000
disks with the data ready on it.
So how is Apple software being used
in this LHC computing environment?
Of course, like I mentioned before,
all scientific computing is
UNIX based and Mac OS X is a very
natural and very good fit there.
People know immediately how
to use it coming from Linux.
The big advantage of course is that on
this kind of machines we can run the
presentation and office software at the
same time as the scientific software,
which has been still lacking
a lot on systems like Linux.
We have excellent development tools.
You heard the talks about
Xcode and things like that.
GCC compilers that we know and trust
because we use them on Linux too,
and we know the results and
the quality of the code.
For the Mac clusters we have,
we use of course the excellent
cluster monitoring software,
which is quite ahead also compared
to the open source software that
we find on the Linux environment.
So it's a very nice environment.
We found that the Intel compiler,
the C++ compiler,
because all our code is purely C++
in the LHC computing environment,
delivers up to 25% faster code than GCC.
So this is very important because it's
almost a CPU generation that you gain
by buying or getting this compiler.
Edwin Schroeder, and Jens Stoltenberg.
We are waiting for Valgrind,
which is an excellent
memory leak detection tool.
We are also having some problems
with the GDB in the C++ environment
because it is not up to par.
We are very happy that a company called
ATNOS released a TotalView debugger
for Mac OS a few months ago,
which is an excellent debugger
and it works perfectly.
So the hardware that we can
use in the LEC environment,
of course the move to
Intel was an enormous,
you know, made Apple a candidate
to be used in our field.
Because before we used some
PowerPC based machines,
but they were just not fast enough for
the money that you could spend on it.
So now with the MacBook Pros,
they are by far the most popular
laptops that we use at CERN.
We have, you know,
basically everybody gets one.
We have powerful OpenGL based graphic
systems used for event display.
So the very nice infrastructure and
the pipelines in the Apples help a lot.
So in Alice we have, for example,
starting small,
a small eight node cluster that
we have configured as a full
member of one of the EGE grid.
So it runs all the software which
is being delivered by the grid
middleware from the central servers.
And it's a full member
of the grid software.
So it's a full member
of the grid environment.
So the interesting thing is, of course,
that universities that see what
we do at CERN can decide now to
buy an Apple based cluster because
they know that all the software,
grid software, middleware that is needed
runs on the Apple machines.
And before that was not the case.
And now the Intel based XSERVs have been
announced and we plan to make quite an
extensive upgrade to these machines.
So to summarize,
the LHC will generate data on a
scale you have never seen before,
nobody has seen before.
We will depend critically
on how the grid will work,
and it has to work,
otherwise we are in big troubles.
And Apple, with the move to Intel, opens,
you know, gives us a fantastic way
to get into this business.
And, you know, they can really approach
universities with,
you know, to set up XServe clusters
for this kind of work.
Okay, that is it.
Thank you very much.
So 10 petabytes per year
of data being generated.
I did a quick calculation.
I think we're probably shipping about
500 petabytes per year of iPod storage.
So if everyone would just set aside
2% of their iPod space per year
we could archive all your data.
I'm not sure people would be willing
to give up 2% of their music though.
Data visualization.
Data visualization is
one of my favorite areas.
It's very visual,
it's very innovative right now.
Of course the trend here is driven by
these huge data sets that are being
generated which ultimately come down
to something that a person wants to
visualize and with a lot of data you end
up with very high resolution data sets.
One of the latest things are display
walls and we're going to hear in detail
about the hyper wall at UC Irvine.
But these are very important in my
mind because you find that the human
brain is actually very good at visual
data processing but when you're just
focusing on a desktop you're actually
missing out on what we evolved to do
over millions of years which is to take
in our entire environment by moving
our head or walking around and these
large display walls really let you take
advantage of that human processing power
in a way that's not been possible before.
Of course stereo 3D is important as
well and we support that on Mac OS X.
For the first time you can do
really high end visualization
tasks on desktop machines.
That is actually more than anything
being driven by the game industry
and it's insatiable need for very
high end graphics processors.
And with the new Pro line that you saw
that will be able to support extremely
high end graphics processor and
coupled with an easy way to program it,
I think that's going to
lead to a lot of new things.
I think that's going to lead
to even more breakthroughs
in scientific visualization.
I think that if you look closely
you'll actually find that because of
this pressure of the gaming industry
the abilities and the programmability
of the GPU has actually outstripped
the scientific community's ability
to take advantage of all that power.
But I think with some of the
programming tools that we're making
available on Mac OS X you're going
to find some really great things.
And I think that's going to lead
to even more You're going to
find some breakthroughs there.
Graphics processing power has
actually been growing at a
faster rate than CPU power.
Maybe that's because they are
willing to run it hotter and put
more fans on the graphics cards.
But we're up to around 10 gigapixels
per second processing rate,
which is, again,
much of the legacy visualization
code does not realize this,
does not take advantage of it.
But some of the newer visualization
applications coming along are
jumping on this bandwagon of,
hey, I've got 10 million pixel process
per second GPU sitting right here.
What can I do with it to give
a very interactive scientific
visualization experience?
With that,
it's my great pleasure to introduce Dr.
Falko Kuester, Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science at
University of California at Irvine,
and he's going to talk
about the Hyperwall.
Thanks a lot.
So I'm going to talk about some of
the research challenges that we really
face today when it comes to dealing
with massive scientific data sets.
Now one of the things we just heard
over and over again is ever bigger
scientific data sets are being
generated today through simulations,
through acquisition, or a mix of the two.
Now that's exciting,
it's a very good thing certainly, right?
We get more detail and hopefully
we get more insight into particular
phenomena we are studying.
The question is how do we get there,
right?
Just having the data doesn't help us,
we somehow need to visualize it,
conceptualize it.
So in the end,
we end up with a high resolution
image that we somehow have to display,
right?
Regardless of which
dimension the data set has,
we need to display it
in 2D on our screen.
So this could be one data set,
one set of, one particular parameter,
or it could be a set of parameters,
a set of different images co-located
that are visually being displayed.
So the question is which one really
works better for what we are doing.
In particular,
if you have to compare different data
sets through some of the techniques
which work so well for the human,
for visual data correlation.
The question is then do we
use pattern recognition,
being able to compare
things side by side,
or do we use our temporal memory,
which we oftenly do today.
We use that, look at one image slice or
one parameter set at a time,
then sequentially we go through
all of these data sets and try
to composite that in our brain.
Doctors do that a lot, right?
It's not necessarily
the best way to do this.
Now if we look at one sample data set,
that's a confocal microscopy scan
that you see in the lower left corner,
of a red brain,
very similar to the human brain.
18,000 pixels by 17,000
pixels resolution,
320 megapixels total for that image.
Great thing, good, very good.
Now we have to map that to state
of the art display devices.
Let's say we pick a 30
inch cinematic display.
We have to put 1,560 by 1,600 pixels
resolution for 4 megapixels total.
Now that becomes interesting, right?
320 megapixels to 4 megapixels.
So we essentially look at 1/80 of
the information at any given time.
Which means if you do
a 1:1 pixel mapping,
we only see 1 out of 80
tiles at any given time.
We don't get the bigger picture.
Or if we sub-sample the information,
we throw away a lot of information
that is really available to us.
That's somewhat bad.
What gets really ugly though is if
you deal with medical data and the
information you're looking at is a
brain scan or a scan of your body,
and what you're sub-sampling away is
the cancer seed cell which is going
to kill you in a couple of years,
right?
And the donor at C might
actually kill you in the end.
So that's not good.
So that's really ugly.
So we have all the three key components.
The good, the bad, the ugly.
The question is how do we handle the bad
and how do we somewhat address the ugly,
right?
So let's see high-performance motivation.
So high-performance, network-centric.
That's why the IP is in the title
"Display Wall". And the objective
really is to support visual analytics,
meaning analytical reasoning
through interactive visualization.
And to really do that for large
data sets in larger or with larger
collaborative teams of researchers,
allowing you to look at multiple
view parameters at any given time,
co-locate information,
have a comparative view,
but do that in a form where we
really have video streaming or
streaming capabilities in general
from diverse sites across the globe.
So there are a couple
of really interesting,
exciting, enabling research areas,
many not fully answered,
so there's much for all of us to do,
in regards to how do we handle images,
video streams.
How do we best move data around?
How do we cache it?
Where do we cache it?
We can't replicate a petabyte
locally just to visualize it.
If you want to look at one particular
subset of the data we just heard about,
how do we visualize it in real time?
How do we support parallel rendering?
And in the end,
how do we put ourselves into that data?
How do we interact with it?
Just displaying it statically
doesn't help us much.
We need to be able to really
manipulate our own forces.
So the hardware front end we
built for this research as part
of HyperWall is a 50 tile display.
Downstairs you will see an 18 tile
version that you can play with.
So 10 tiles wide, 5 tiles high,
50 tiles total.
Each tile essentially has
4 megapixel resolution,
which gives us 25,600 by 8,000
pixels overall to work with.
Now let's put that in
today's gold standard,
right?
HD, high definition video, 1080.
We have roughly 2 megapixels resolution,
right?
So one half of one HyperWall
tile is high def video.
Or in other words,
HD is 1% of the resolution
that HyperWall gives us.
Why do we do this?
We're sort of trying to extrapolate
ahead where we're going to be a couple
of years from now when we have organic
light emitting displays that we can
glue on walls or simply spray paint,
right?
How do we drive this?
Or since there are 10,000 of displays
shipped already of this particular type,
what happens if you connect
them today to build these
pervasive visualization spaces?
How do we drive that
information possibly,
right?
How do we get people to collaborate?
So in this case, the 50 tiles are powered
through 25 dual processor,
dual core display nodes.
There's roughly 50 terabytes of
cache disk space storage behind it.
And everything is networked
essentially through fiber locally
for data transport visualization,
but then globally through the Optiputer,
a dedicated optical.
And that's the optical
network that we can work with.
Now, the obvious challenge, right?
Massive amounts of
pixels have to be filled.
If you just think about
24-bit RGB per pixel,
we have 4.8 gigabit per frame.
Now we want 60 frames per second, right?
So that gets quite interesting.
How do we generate these
pixels in the first place?
How do we fill them in the end?
And how do we do it at an interactive
rate so we can actually really
work with it in a meaningful form?
Now, scalability and failure tolerance,
and suddenly becomes a really big issue,
right?
When one of these tiles fails,
you're suddenly at a loss.
It sort of blows your
entire workspace to pieces.
So we decided to go with a really
reconfigurable IP-based display system,
which allows us primarily
to add components,
new resources as they become
available quite transparently,
but it also allows us to replace
or remove failed components.
Since it's network-centric,
we have access to all of the
existing data repositories out there.
So being able to tie into existing
data sources is of course important.
And then to use the
visualization assets you have,
the data you have, to really drive
interactive visualization,
data fusion,
leveraging the GPUs as much as we can.
So here are just a couple of examples.
And if you want to hear more
about the details or the fun
stuff underneath the hood,
which is really the science
and research contribution,
come downstairs and
we'll talk a little bit.
Here's one example,
natural disaster management.
Eric and Katrina,
all of us heard about it.
Quite devastating, both to loss of life
and financial impact.
The problem is you have
pre- and post-event imagery,
for example.
How do you identify what
crisis hotspots are?
How do you do it in team environments
so that emergency management folks can
deploy field responders more intuitively?
So in this case, with image processing,
large-scale visualization,
we have a mechanism to get a
better grasp of the bigger picture,
the magnitude of what
really has occurred,
to address it.
Now, rather than one or a
couple of big images,
we might be able to deal
with many smaller images.
So we're working with folks
in brain imaging to identify
particular patterns that might
exist in brain-related diseases,
such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's,
schizophrenia,
things that should be close to all of
our hearts since they're quite pervasive.
So in this case,
providing a lot of visual information
concurrently for many patients,
being able to scroll through
particular slices over time
and visually identify other
particular patterns which may occur.
And that, of course,
works then in 3D as well, right?
Surface, representation, volume rendered,
or texture map information,
so in this case, brain activation on
top of everything else.
Earth system science,
another huge area of this
gigantic computational resources,
hundreds of thousands of
processes running problems.
One example being the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change,
which is doing a 100-year simulation
of how our climate will change.
20 different groups worldwide,
independent from each other,
that want to compare data and
figure out if there's at least one
parameter that everybody agrees on,
which is difficult, right?
So we can't just average all the
data together and visualize it.
We really need to show it co-located
so teams feel comfortable that their
particular simulation is maintained.
But in this case also, since grids,
meshes vary,
information is properly represented.
And it was quite beneficial because
individual simulation problems jumped out
right away where somebody had a parameter
wrong or the timing simply set up wrong.
Now, if you go from image data,
of course, to 3D, right?
Digital elevation maps
being a great example,
terrain rendering,
all the good stuff you've heard about.
So that was Google Earth, for example.
And then of course the next step,
volume rendering and so on.
One very exciting area though is remote
visualization or control of experimental
infrastructure from very high-end imaging
systems deployed in different areas.
One example in our case is an electron
microscope in our building which
generates image data by far exceeding
any display capability existing today.
So the idea is why don't we use
this wall type interface to really
cure and control the imaging system
which might exist somewhere else,
right?
All we really need is
that big network pipe.
So in this case what you see across the
entire display is actually 300 microns,
right?
Lower left corner gives
you a scale of 10 microns.
So that's a tremendous amount of
very high resolution image data
that's suddenly being processed.
Now there's an interesting set
of impacts that we're aiming at.
And by long shot we're not there yet,
right?
So everybody has a challenge to
contribute to that hopefully.
So HyperWall is intended to
enable analytical reasoning
through interactive visualization.
There are three important areas:
support interactive collaboration
on a somewhat larger scale than just
our research lab to help with the
detection and correlation of patterns.
Leverage really the power of the
human visual brain to intuit data.
We're all very well trained to
work in our particular domain.
If you bring people together,
cross-fertilize, tremendous impact.
But the key aspect really is we
want to enable the discovery of the
unexpected while exploring the expected.
So in visualization in many cases we
look at data we're already expecting.
But we visualize it the
way we expect it to be.
Now if we find the things we
haven't been able to see before,
that's a huge contribution.
So in the end we have to provide
a means to really analyze
large scale data sets in 2D,
3D or higher dimension.
And makes that one innovation right
to save our life at the end hopefully.
So feel free to come by
downstairs ask more questions.
Feel free to talk to us in person.
There are many interesting research
opportunities in our group.
Bold plug here,
but many open jobs in hands-on research,
hyper-wall related, grid centric,
and of course on plenty
of good Apple hardware.
Thanks very much and I really encourage
you to go downstairs and take a look at
the smaller version of the hyper wall.
It really is an insight as
to what can the human brain
actually process usefully.
It's a lot more than just
even a 30 inch display.
This last area I want to talk
about is I think absolutely
critical to the sciences.
Open standards and
related to open standards,
open source.
[Transcript missing]
So, I would like to start by thanking
Apple for inviting me to talk
to you about BioCoCo today.
So, in biology,
sequence data becomes more
and more important and plays
a tremendous important role.
And that is not only in really
large-scale bioinformatics
projects like of the size of Phons,
of Radema or Falco's projects.
But even like for wet lab
biologists like myself,
biological data in the form of sequence
data formats plays an important role.
We work with it on a daily basis.
So this is one for instance and
we usually retrieve them from
these large public databases that
Bud was already referring to.
But for instance here you see a very
simple format as we get the sequences
which is basically a one line description
followed by the actual sequence.
But we also have more complex data
formats like this one where you
have a lot of extra metadata about a
sequence like the date it was published
and the species it was generated
for or what's not on this slide.
This particular sequence for
instance encodes a protein which
is the molecular target of Viagra.
But the big problem really is that
with the big rise in bioinformatics
we saw an enormous explosion of all
these different sequence formats and
it was basically because everyone
was just inventing their own formats.
So as a developer you're... Excuse me.
As a developer... I will
go back to that one.
So as a developer it's your
task to basically support
all those different formats.
And that is a tedious task and not
really fun to do because you basically
have to reinvent the wheel all the time.
And everyone has to do that.
And also Peter Schoels
from Belgium recognized
that as a Cocoa developer.
And he decided that it would be time
for a lightweight Cocoa framework that
would allow you to support all these
formats with only a few lines of code.
Well, you saw it already.
As an example,
this is what he came up with.
Instead of having to get into
all these open standards,
you now just have to
implement a few lines of code.
We basically instantiate a reader
object and the framework does
the rest for you if you handle
it to pass through the file.
And it returns you a dictionary with
all the sequence files information.
Now, when I was developing our
DNA sequence editor in Cocoa,
EnzymeX, this was all I basically need
for now to have EnzymeX support
all these different formats.
And I could basically focus on all the
pretty stuff and all the nice features,
which was very handy.
So, quite soon after I and another
few Cocoa developers got
involved in the BioCocoa project,
we realized that there was actually
a need for a much broader format.
Much like, for instance,
the Java language has the BioJava
project and Perl has the BioPerl project,
etc.
So, together we decided that it
was time for BioCocoa 2.0.
And what we wanted to do in
this framework is the following.
We started from scratch and we basically
wanted to provide Cocoa developers
with a complete set of model objects
to represent biological sequences.
And of course,
we would then still allow to support all
the different popular sequence formats.
And together this would form
the core of the framework.
But on top of that,
we would like to add a number of tools
to play with these model objects.
Like, for instance,
you can imagine you want to translate
this DNA sequence in that protein,
which is the target of, well, etc.
So, and we would like to add advanced
tools for sequence analysis,
like alignment tools
or these kind of stuff.
So, and finally, ideally,
a set of UI elements that would
allow end users to consistently
deal with those model objects.
And together this would give
Cocoa developers a complete,
powerful framework to make
bioinformatic applications.
Now,
if you look at the framework overview,
which you see basically here,
which we have in mind,
then you can obviously also
see the analogy with the Cocoa.
And we really try to make the
framework really leverage this powerful
Objective-C language and the Cocoa APIs.
And as an example, we use, for instance,
NSData as a way in the
BC sequence model object,
as a way to give developers low-level
access to the sequence data,
but at the same time in
a very user-friendly way.
So, and I'm happy to announce that
actually today we released a beta
version of the core of BioCocoa.
So, if you're interested in that,
please visit our website.
Or we will do it later today
because it still has to be uploaded.
But you can find it there.
I will show you the URL in the end.
But it's not,
we're obviously not there yet.
So, we still have to add tools and
that's what we're basically doing.
But that's something we could
really use a lot of help in.
So, if you're interested, be sure to,
and you're a Cocoa developer
targeting biosciences,
then be sure to visit our website.
It's actually here.
It's on bioinformatics.org/bioCocoa.
And even better, if you wanted to have
questions already or comments,
then yeah, feel free to visit us at the
poster session tomorrow evening.
Or we have, I think,
a Thursday morning from 11:00 to 12:00 we
have a session in the Science Connection.
So, I hope to see you there.
And I think BioCoa is a nice example
of how open source can in this
case maybe tackle the problem of,
in this case,
maybe too many open standard formats.
But, and with your help,
we can even maybe bring
it much further than that.
So, thank you.
Okay, so I'm just going to do a real
quick wrap up and cover some
things also going on at the show.
First I'd just like to say I think
we've heard a really nice discussion
on some of the prevailing topics
in scientific computing today.
You know, the diversity of data sets,
the really big visuals
and the power of this,
the need for really big storage
and how all the data that's being
generated is really driving this,
and then open standards.
So how do we learn more about all of
these things at the show and where can
you connect with people and network
with folks around scientific computing?
I really want to call your attention to
the scientific development poster session
if you don't already know about this.
So this is our first year doing a
poster session and I have to say the
idea came from our developers last
year at the developer conference.
This was a request that was
made and we were really excited
to be able to deliver this.
We have over 50 posters being presented.
It's a fantastic idea.
It's a fantastic way to find out what
your colleagues are doing and network
with folks and just read about some
really cool development going on.
This is Wednesday from 7 to 10 p.m.
There's also some demos of the
code being presented in these
posters in the Science Connection,
which is here on the third floor,
Wednesday and Thursday from 9 to 6.
And there's a schedule,
a revolving schedule at the entry to the
Science Connection if you're interested
in seeing what's going to be demoed.
In addition, we've been hearing,
you know,
go downstairs and see the hyper wall.
That's actually in an area
called Apple in the Lab.
And we've got a big focus on
scientific visualization there.
It's on the first floor.
It's open through Thursday.
So take a look down there.
We have the smaller
version of the hyper wall.
We've also got some fantastic 3D,
stereo 3D visualization stations
set up for medical imaging as well
as for some molecular imaging,
molecular modeling,
and some other really cool
technologies on display.
So take a look at that.
The Science Connection,
which is here on the third floor,
it's just a place you can
hook up to the network,
sit down, talk to your colleagues,
take a break, look at some demos,
play with some hardware, whatever.
It's just a nice place to hang out.
And then we're having
community discussions either
in the Science Connection or
right across the way today,
tomorrow, and Thursday at lunch
between 1230 and 130.
And the topics are Mac OS X technology.
So we're going to be having a lot of
discussion about the Mac OS X technology.
And then we're going to be
having a lot of discussion
about the Mac OS X technology.
And then we're going to be
having a lot of discussion
about the Mac OS X technology.
There's some nice sessions here at
the developer conference that really
relate to the topics you heard today.
I'm going to leave this up
for those of you that haven't,
you want to take a few
minutes to look at this.